What is position in CSS?

The position property in CSS is used to control how an element is placed on a webpage. It determines whether an element follows the normal document flow or is positioned differently.

Types of position in CSS

Position Type	    Description
static	           Default position (normal document flow)
relative	       Moves an element relative to its normal position
absolute	       Positions an element relative to the nearest positioned ancestor
fixed	           Positions an element relative to the viewport (stays in place while scrolling)
sticky	           Sticks to a position while scrolling and then stops

Real-Life Examples

Imagine a chessboard where different chess pieces have different positioning rules.

1. static (Default Position)
📌 Example: Think of the pawns in a chess game. They start in a fixed place and move according to the game's normal rules.


🔹 Effect: The element follows the normal document flow.

2. relative (Moves from its original position)
📌 Example: A horse (knight) in chess moves in an L-shape but still respects its starting position.

css

p {
    position: relative;
    top: 20px;
    left: 30px;
}
🔹 Effect: The element moves 20px down and 30px right but still takes up space in the original layout.

3. absolute (Moves independently, ignores normal layout)
📌 Example: A drone hovering independently in the sky does not follow the ground rules.

css

p {
    position: absolute;
    top: 50px;
    left: 100px;
}
🔹 Effect: The element moves relative to its nearest positioned ancestor (if none, it moves relative to the <html> body).

4. fixed (Stays in one place, even when scrolling)
📌 Example: A sticky note on a fridge remains in the same place, no matter where you walk in the kitchen.

css

p {
    position: fixed;
    top: 10px;
    right: 10px;
}
🔹 Effect: The element stays at the top-right corner even when the user scrolls.

5. sticky (Acts like relative but sticks when scrolling)
📌 Example: A bus stop sign moves with the bus but sticks in place when stopped.

css

p {
    position: sticky;
    top: 0;
}
🔹 Effect: The element scrolls normally but sticks at the top when it reaches top: 0;.